---
layout: post
type: text
date: 2011-12-27 22:05:05 GMT
title: "Empire"
permalink: /post/14881514992/empire
redirect_from: 
  - /post/14881514992/empire
categories:
- empire
- america
- politics
- republicans
- democrats
- democracy
- orson scott card
- fanaticism
---
<p>Just finished reading <i>Empire</i> by Orson Scott Card, most famously known for his <i>Ender's Game</i> series. It's an action and political thriller about the start of an American civil war between fanatics on the Left and the Right and the rise of a dictatorship. Most powerful is the afterward where he shares the thoughts that formed the seed of the novel:</p>

<blockquote><p>A good working definition of fanaticism is that you are so convinced of your views and policies that you are sure anyone who opposes them must either be stupid and deceived or have some ulterior motive. We are today a nation where almost everyone in the public eye displays fanaticism with every utterance.</p>
<p>We live in a time when lies are preferred to the truth and truths are called lies, when opponents are assumed to have the worst conceivable motives and treated accordingly, and when we reach immediately for coercion without bothering to find out what those who disagree with us are actually saying.</p>
<p>In short, we are creating for ourselves a new dark age - the darkness of blinders we voluntarily wear, and which, if we do not take them off and see each other as human beings with legitimate, virtuous concerns, will lead us to tragedies which cost we bear for generations.</p>
<p>Or maybe, we can just calm down and stop thinking that our own ideas are so precious that we must never give an inch to accomodate the heartfelt beliefs of the others.</p>
<p>How can we accomplish that? It begins by scorning the voices of extremism from the camp we are aligned with. Democrats and Republicans much renounce the screamers and heaters from their own side instead of continuing to embrace them and denouncing only the screamers from the opposing camp. We must moderate ourselves instead of insisting on moderating the other guy while keeping our own fanatism alive.</p></blockquote>